# edgecraft

This simulator closely follows the work of Hotta, et al., 2022.
In this project, we simulate a quantum hall edge expansion and attempt to find voltages that we may apply to a semiconductor to attain a given scale factor.
We know from Hotta, et al., 2022 that the scale factor influences much of the dynamics of a system. We can create scale factors that match well-known models of an expanding universe and attempt to measure their results. In this way, we hope to find Hawking radiation and many more phenomenon.

## The setup
We start by describing a piece of silicon (I think it's silicon) as a $594 \times 792$ array of points in space. We then apply a series of etchings that apply a potential to the system. Don't know how we came up with those etchings in particular, but we have them now. The etchings are chosen such that the energy of the system along a particular curved edge is relatively high while the energy elsewhere is low. This allows the electrons in the edge to move, but the electrons elsewhere (in the bulk) are fixed in place. In particular, we can observe if an electron has enough energy to jump between energy states and therefore travel along the silicon. We say that an electron has enough energy if it is within a margin of error generated by the thermal fluctuations of the system of the Fermi energy. These points in space are the edge points, and everything else is the bulk.

We introduce another etching into the system that applies a time-dependent potential. By incrementing the magnitude of the potential, we see that it changes the points that are edge points. In particular it makes the curve shorter.

## Edge length
We have a set of edge points that are a subset of our $594 \times 792$ space. In particular, you will observe that they are a connected and relatively curve-looking set of points that travel from the top of our space to the bottom. We can then describe a general edge that has no width as follows: at each y coordinate, take the general edge's x coordinate to be the center of all the edge points at that y coordinate. Now we have a widthless edge (or an edge with width 1 if you think of each point as a pizel) that well fits the edge points. Calculating the length of this edge is simple: draw a line between points with consecutive y-coordinates and sum up the lengths of those lines.

## Scale factor
With a method to calculate the edge legnth, we can do so for each time increment of our time-dependent potential. This gives us a function $d(t): \text{time} \rightarrow \text{distance}$. From I don't know where, we know that the scale factor is $a_0(t)=\frac{d(t)}{d(0)}$ as a function of reference time. For a useful scale factor we need it in terms of proper time. This is another simple transformation from Hotta, et al., 2022: $t(\tau)=\int_0^{\tau}\frac{1}{a(\tau\prime)}d\tau\prime$. We can then calculate $a_0(\tau)=a_0(t(\tau))$ and we obtain the scale factor.

## Going backwards
In order to make a useful model, we need to replicate the effects of certain system under general relativity. We need to be able to replicate any  scale factor $ a(\tau)$, and we need to construct a potential that will make it. Fortunately, our original simulation helps here. Looking at the scale factor obtained by our original time-dependent potential, it takes on many values between .93 and 1. So for scale factors $a(\tau _0)$ between .93 and 1, we can at each increment apply the potential from our original simulation that produces a scale factor closest to the desired scale factor. That is, we choose a $\tau$ that minimizes $|a_0(\tau)-a(\tau _0)|$, which can be done with a simple search function. The results are displayed for a cosine function: it produces a good approximation. 